Arma virumque cano,  
Of arms and the hero I sing,  

qui primus ab oris Troiae,
who first from the shores of Troy,

profugus fato,
an exile by fate,

venit Italiam Laviniaque litora;
came to Italy and the Lavinian shores;

multum iactatus ille et terris et alto, 
much tossed (was) he both on the lands and on the deep,  

vi superum, 
through the violence of the gods above,

ob memorem iram saevae Iunonis;
on account of the unforgetting rage of cruel Juno;

et multa quoque passus bello,  
and many things also having suffered in war, 

dum conderet urbem inferretque deos Latino:
'till he should found a city and introduce (his) gods into Latium;

unde Latinum genus,  
whence the Latin folks,  

Albanique patres,
and the Alban fathers,

atque moenia altae Romae.
and the battlements of lofty Rome.

Musa, memora mihi causas,   
O muse, relate to me the causes,    

quo numine laeso, dolensve quid,
what deity having been offended or grieving at what,

regina deum impulerit virum insignem pietate volvere tot casus,
the queen of the gods compelled a hero renowned for piety to undergo so many calamities,

adire tot labores.
to encounter so many toils.

Tantaene irae caelestibus animis?
Is there so great rage in heavenly minds?

Fuit antiqua urbs, Tyrii coloni tenuere,
There was an ancient city. Tyrian settlers posessed it,

Karthago, contra Italiam ostiaque Tiberina, longe, dives opum asperrimaque studiis belli,
Carthage, over against Italy and the mouths of the Tiberina, far distant, rich in resources and fiercest in pursuing war,

quam Juno fertur coluisse unam magis omnibus terris
which Juno is said to have cherished alone more than all lands,

Samo posthabita;
Samos being an afterthought;

hie illius arma, hie fuit currus;
here were her arms, here was her chariot;

dea iam tum tenditque fovetque hoc esse regnum gentibus,
the goddess already then both aims and fondly hopoes that this shall be the sovereignty for the nations,

si qua fata sinant.
if by any means the Fates permit.

Sed enim audierat progeniem duci a Troiano sanguine, 
But indeed  she had heard that a race was derived from Trojan blood,

quae olim verteret Tyrias arces;
which hereafter should overthrow the Tyrian towers;

hinc populum late regem belloque superbum venturum excidio Libyae;
that hence a nation ruling far and wide and proud in war would come for the destruction of Libya;

sic Parcas volvere.
thus the Fates were spinning.

Saturnia metuens id, 
The daughter of Saturn fearing this,

memorque veteris belli quod prima gesserat ad Troiam pro caris Argis needum etiam caussae irarum saevique dolores exciderant animo;
and mindful of the old war which she the foremost had carried on at Troy for her beloved Greeks nor yet indeed had the causes of wrath and her bitter resentment departed from her soul;

manet alta repostum mente iudicium Paridis,
There remains deep-stored in her mind the judgement of Paris,

iniuriaque spretae formae,
and the wrong to her slighted beauty,

and the hated race,
et invisum genus,

et honores rapti Ganymedis accensa his super,
and the honors of ravished Ganymede inflamed by these things moreover,

arcebat longe Latio Troas,
she was restraining far from Latium the Trojans,

reliquias Danaum atque immitis Achilli,
the remnants from the Greeks and cruel Achilles,

iactatos toto aequore;
tossed on the whole ocean;

perque multos annos errabant,
and through many years they were wandering,

acti Fatis circum omnia maria
driven by the fates round all the seas

Tantae molis erat condere Romanam gentem.
Of so great a toil was it to found the Roman race.

Vix e conspectu Siculae telluris dabant vela in altum,
Scare out of sight of the Sicilian land they were giving sail upon the deep,

et laeti ruebant aere spumas salis,
and joyously were turning up with the bronze (prow) the foam of the salt,

cuym Juno servans sub pectore aeternum volnus,
when Juno nursing within heart the everlasting wound,

haec secum:
spoke thus to herself:

 